# MA90: Ethics in Math, Data Science & Engineering

##### -<ins>Course Description</ins>: This course is intended to serve as an integrative experience for students of all majors and FOSs. Students having completed the core math program will be given the opportunity to explore ethical issues including legitimate data use, algorithmic fairness, and further develop skills in model construction and analysis while addressing problems and scenarios with practical applications from science, social sciences, engineering, computer science and/or mathematics. Interdisciplinary projects based on actual modeling scenarios are used to explore ethical issues and integrate the various topics into a coherent theme.
##### -<ins>Project</ins>: Gun Control Case Study. You are the science advisor for the President. And you must provide a summary of the public health effects of gun violence. At a minimum, you must address the following: Gun rights activists argue that around 2.5 million Americans use a gun in self-defense every year. Gun control activists argue that this number is way to high; it’s closer to 60,000. What is a reasonable estimate of the number of Americans who use a gun in self-defense annually? About two thirds of suicides in the U.S. are committed with firearms. Gun rights activists argue that if you remove one way for people to kill themselves, they’ll just substitute another (called “substitution”). Other research suggests that if you remove a popular way that people commit suicide, fewer people kill themselves (called “means restriction”). What does the evidence say we can expect with respect to the suicide rate if people’s access to guns is limited? The gun lobby argues that if law-abiding citizens are armed, criminals will be deterred. “The presence of weapons alone can stop crime. And when you take them away, the bad guys have the upper hand.” (NRA News Commentator Dom Raso) However, others argue that the research supporting these claims is flawed. Is there evidence that allowing people to carry concealed weapons reduces crime? The President is willing to accept that gun ownership is not related to the overall crime rate. However, he would like you to address the effect of guns of female homicides. Although there is little data tying guns to overall crime rates and evidence linking guns to homicides in general has exceptions, there is unambiguous data that women are more likely to be murdered in states with more guns. Comment on this specific linkage. Is it likely this is just a “statistical anomaly”? Is there a plausible explanation for why women specifically are more likely to be murdered in areas with high gun ownership? Finally, design a study (or experiment if feasible) to collect data that would allow you to answer these questions more completely. Your study should be feasible and ethically sound. It must be described in enough detail that someone could execute it with no additional guidance. You should clearly describe how the data could be used to answer these questions and what assumptions must be made in order to do so. You do not need to give exact statistical methods used in analysis. Please note that you are not being asked to advocate for or against any specific policy. Your role is simply to give the President an idea of the effects reasonably expected of limiting widespread access to guns in the U.S. Also note that you are being asked to present scientific arguments, not legal ones. Specifically, nowhere in your mission is anything about the 2nd Amendment, the right to bear arms or the U.S. constitution in general. These may be important topics for the larger discussion but they are outside of your role.
